
* Behind-Neck Pull-Up – Negative Only: This exercise uses a horizontal chin-up bar. You also need a sturdy bench. Perform the positive work by stepping up on the bench and the negative work by lowering your body with your arms. Take an overhand grip on the bar, with your hands approximately 12 inches wider than your shoulders. Climb into the top position and place the bar behind your neck. Your elbows should be down and back. Hold the top position tightly and ease your feet off the bench. Lower your body slowly in 6-8 seconds. At the bottom, stretch briefly, and climb back quickly to the top, and begin another negative rep. You should feel this exercise deeply in your biceps, lats, and shoulders.

* Note: It’s doubtful that you’ll need to add resistance with a weight belt. If you can achieve at least 6 repetitions the first time you try it, you’ll indeed be a prime suspect for growth.
* Bench Press with Barbell – Negative Only: You need one or two spotters to lift the bar. Load a barbell on the supports of a flat bench with 30 percent more resistance than you regularly handle for 6-8 reps. Set up on the bench and grasp the barbell with your hands positioned slightly wider than your shoulders. Have the spotters lift the bar into the starting position. The barbell should be directly above your shoulders. Lower the bar slowly in 4 to 8 seconds to your chest. When you touch your chest, the spotters lift the bar back to the top position. The spotters lift 80 percent of the resistance, while you guide the barbell properly to the top. As they transfer the resistance securely in your hands, take a deep breath, and continue the slow negatives for the required repetitions.
* Bent-Armed Pullover with EZ-Curl Bar – Regular: I prefer an EZ-Curl to a straight bar because it relieves excess torque from of the wrists and allows external rotation of the humerus, which is a safer position for the shoulders. Place a loaded EZ-Curl bar on the floor at the head end of a sturdy bench. Lie face up on the bench, with your head off the end. Reach overhead and down and grasp the EZ-Curl bar with narrow hand spacing. Anchor your lower body, arch your back slightly, and pull the bar up and over your torso to your chest. The bar should be resting across your chest on your sternum. Move the bar back over your head toward the floor. Stretch your lats and shoulders gradually at the bottom. Do not straighten your arms. Keep them bent throughout both the positive and negative phases.

* Note: The involved pulling muscles have the potential to be big and strong. Don’t be afraid eventually to use 150 pounds or more on this exercise. But be careful at first on increasing the range of movement; do so gradually.
* Bent-Over Row with Barbell – Regular: Place your feet close together under a loaded barbell. Bend over and grasp the barbell with an underhand grip. An underhand grip, compared to an overhand grip, places your biceps in the strongest position. Your hands should be 4-6 inches apart. Your torso should remain parallel to the floor. Keep a slight bend in your knees to reduce the stress on your lower back and hamstrings. Pull the barbell up to your waist. Pause in the top position and try to pinch your shoulder blades together. Lower slowly to the bottom and stretch.
* Biceps Curl with Barbell – Negative Only: Load a barbell with 30 percent more resistance than you handle regularly for 10 repetitions. Have a spotter at both ends of the barbell lift the resistance to the top position of the curl. Grasp the bar with a shoulder-width underhand grip. Anchor your elbows firmly against the sides of your waist and keep them there throughout the exercise. Lower the bar slowly in 4 to 8 seconds to the bottom. As soon as you reach the bottom, the spotters lift the bar back to the top. The spotters need to perform the positive, lifting phase quickly and the transfer must be handled smoothly. Again, it’s your job to lower slowly under control.

* Note: The biceps curl with a barbell was one of Arthur Jones’s all-time favorite exercises and that’s why he often included it in his barbell routines. When Jones was in the best shape of his life, he weighed 200 pounds. He told me that at that weight he was able to curl a 180-pound barbell for 10 solid repetitions. That took some very strong biceps muscles.
* Chin-Up – Regular: Grasp a horizontal bar with a shoulder-width, underhand grip. Hang at arm’s length and bend your knees and cross your ankles. You should return to this dead-hang position each time you lower your body. Pull your head and chest toward the bar. Once your chin is over the bar, move your upper arms down and squeeze your shoulder blades together. Lower your body smoothly to the dead-hang position. Repeat for maximum repetitions.
* Chin-Up – Negative Only: Again, use a sturdy bench to climb into the top position. The idea is to do the positive by stepping up into the top position and the negative work with your arms. Place the bench directly under a horizontal bar. Climb into the top position with your chin over the bar. Hold on to the bar with an underhand grip and space your hands shoulder-width apart. Remove your feet from the chair or bench. Lower your body very slowly in 6-8 seconds. Make sure you come all the way down to a dead hang. Climb back quickly into the top position.

* Note: To add weight, use a weight belt and attach an appropriate weight on the chain. Some trainees can use from 60 to 100 pounds of attached weight on this exercise.
* Dip – Regular: Mount the dip bars and extend your arms. Bend your knees and cross your ankles. Lower your body slowly by bending your elbows until your upper arms dip just below your elbows. Push back to the starting position. When you can successfully do 10 or more dips, use a weight belt to add resistance.
* Dip – Negative Only: Most trainees will require extra resistance added to their body weight with a weight belt. Climb into the top position of a dip station and straighten your arms. Remove your feet from the step support and stabilize your body. Bend your arms and lower your body slowly in 6-8 seconds. Feel the stretch by going just below where your upper arms are parallel to the floor, which shouldn’t be painful. Climb back to the starting position and straighten your arms.

* Note: Dips were one of Casey Viator’s favorite exercises. He could do more than 30 regular dips in strict form, and I’ve seen him do 10 negative-only dips with 270 pounds attached to his body.
* Lat-Machine Pulldown to Chest – Regular: Stabilize yourself under the lat machine and grasp the overhead bar with an underhand grip. Your hands should be about shoulder width apart. Pull the bar smoothly to your upper chest. Pause. Return slowly to the stretched position. Repeat for 7 to 10 repetitions.

* Note: Arthur Jones was partial to applying the lat-machine pulldown immediately after the bent-armed pullover – and he used this combination frequently in his workouts.
* Lateral Raise with Dumbbells – Regular: Grasp a dumbbell in each hand and stand. Lean forward at the waist approximately 20 degrees from vertical. Stay in this leaning-forward position throughout the exercise. Lock your elbows and wrists and keep them locked throughout the exercise. All the action should be around your shoulder joints. Raise your arms sideways. Pause briefly when the dumbbells are slightly above horizontal. Make sure your elbows are slightly bent. Lower the dumbbells slowly to your sides.
* Leg Curl Machine – Negative Only: You need a spotter to do the lifting portion of this exercise. Place 30 percent more resistance on the weight stack than you regularly use for 10 reps. Lie facedown on the machine with your knees on the pad edge closest to the movement arm. Make certain your knees are in line with the axis of rotation of the machine. Grasp the handles provided to steady your upper body. The spotter helps you lift the movement arm to the contracted position. Pause and make a smooth transfer of the resistance to your contracted hamstring muscles. Lower the resistance very slowly in 4 to 8 seconds. Use the spotter to get back to the top position and continue the negative leg curls until you can no longer do at least a 3-second descent.
* Leg Extension Machine – Negative Only: You need a spotter to do the lifting portion of this exercise. Place 30 percent more resistance on the machine than you regularly do for 10 repetitions. Sit in the machine and place your feet and ankles behind the roller pads. Align your knees with the axis of rotation of the movement arm. Lean back and stabilize your upper body by grasping the handles or the sides of the seat. The spotter helps you lift the movement arm into the fully contracted top position and make a smooth transfer of the weight. You lower the weight in 4 to 8 seconds back to the starting position. Immediately, the spotter grabs the movement arm at the bottom and helps you quickly get it back to the top position. Continue performing reps until you can no longer manage a 3-second negative.
* Overhead Triceps Extension with Dumbbell – Regular: Hold a dumbbell at one end with both hands. Press the dumbbell overhead. Place your elbows in tight and close to your ears throughout the exercise. Bend the elbows and lower the dumbbell slowly behind your head. Don’t move your elbows. Only your forearms and hands should move. Be careful in the bottom position, where the triceps are stretched and vulnerable to strains. Move in and out of the bottom position gradually with no jerks. Press the dumbbell smoothly back to the extended position.
* Overhead Press with Barbell – Regular: Stand and place a barbell in front of your shoulders with your hands slightly wider than your shoulders. Keep your feet shoulder width apart. Press the barbell overhead smoothly. Do not slam into the lockout. Keep a slight bend in your elbows at the top, which will keep the active muscles loaded. Lower the weight under control (2 to 3 seconds) to your shoulders. Do not bounce the barbell off your shoulders at the bottom. Make a smooth turnaround.
* Shoulder Shrug with Barbell – Regular: Take an overhand grip on a barbell and stand erect. Your hands should be slightly wider apart than your shoulders, and the bar should be touching your thighs. Relax your shoulders forward and downward as far as comfortably possible. Shrug your shoulders upward as high as possible. Pause briefly at the top. Lower slowly to the stretched position.
* Squat with Barbell – Regular: Place a barbell on a squat rack and load it with an appropriate weight. Position the bar behind your neck across your trapezius muscles, and hold the bar in place with your hands. If the bar cuts into your skin, pad it lightly by wrapping a towel around the bar. Lift the bar off the rack and move back one step. Place your feet shoulder-width apart, toes angled slightly outward. Keep your upper-body muscles rigid and your torso as upright as possible during this exercise. Bend your hips and knees and smoothly descend to a position whereby your hamstrings firmly come in contact with your calves. Without bouncing or stopping in the bottom position, slowly make the turnaround from negative to positive. Lift the barbell back to the top position.
* Stiff-Legged Deadlift with Barbell – Regular: Even though this exercise is called a stiff-legged deadlift, it should be performed with a slight bend in your knees. This protects the lower back and the hamstrings. Stand over a barbell, bend your hips and knees, and grasp the bar with an overhand grip with your hands shoulder-width apart. Extend your hips and knees and lift the barbell smoothly to a standing position. Lower the barbell smoothly while keeping a slight bend in your knees. Touch the floor lightly with the barbell, but do not come to a stop. Lift the barbell smoothly to the standing position. Repeat for 7 to 10 repetitions.

* Note: Ease into the stiff-legged deadlift, especially if you have tenderness or pain in your lower back or tight hamstrings.
* Wrist Curl with Barbell – Regular: Grasp a barbell with a palms-up grip. Sit down and rest your forearms on your thighs and the backs of your hands against your knees. Lean forward until the angle between your upper arms and forearms is less than 90 degrees. This position allows you to isolate your forearms better. Curl your hands smoothly by contracting your forearm muscles. Pause briefly. Lower the barbell slowly.
